---
source_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.13323
ingested: 2026-07-24
sha256: b9e8d1fcd7482caae7d1710bbee7a9eaed7dc7c31effd1e4ddbe0ce3f1d165b7
---

AI Behavioral Science∗ Matthew O. Jackson1,2 Qiaozhu Mei3 Stephanie W. Wang4 Yutong Xie3 Walter Yuan5 Seth Benzell6 Erik Brynjolfsson1 Colin F. Camerer7 James Evans8,2 Brian Jabarian8 Jon Kleinberg9 Juanjuan Meng10 Sendhil Mullainathan11 Asuman Ozdaglar11 Thomas Pfeiffer12 Moshe Tennenholtz13 Robb Willer1 Diyi Yang1 Teng Ye14 .
1Stanford University 2Santa Fe Institute 3University of Michigan 4University of Pittsburgh 5MobLab 6Chapman University 7California Institute of Technology 8University of Chicago 9Cornell University 10Peking University 11Massachusetts Institute of Technology 12Massey University 13Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 14University of Minnesota May 2026 Abstract We outline a foundation for a new field of “AI Behavioral Science,” covering three perspectives.
First, as AI becomes ubiquitous and is increasingly proprietary and opaque, it becomes vital to develop techniques for assessing AI behavior. We outline how tools developed to assess people’s behaviors by social scientists can be used to assess and infer AI’s behaviors biases, tendencies, and heuristics. Second, we also discuss how AI can change the ways in which we learn about human behavior.
Beyond its computational power, AI offers new techniques for simulating, inferring, and predicting human behaviors that we outline and discuss. Third, as humans and AI are interacting in increasingly complex and intertwined systems, we need to understand the implications for the resulting economic and political outcomes. We outline issues that are increasingly pressing concerning the future of ∗This grew out of a workshop of the same name held at CASBS in spring 2025.
1 arXiv:2509.13323v2 [cs.HC] 29 May 2026 human-AI interactions and potential changes and disruptions that can ensue.
How can we use behavioral science to better understand AI’s biases, tendencies, and heuristics? How can we use AI to better understand human behavior? How are AI and human interactions evolving when taking place in increasingly complex combinations, and can we predict and prepare for the shifting economy as AI both augments and displaces humans?
These are three core questions in a new field of what we call “AI Be-havioral Science” that is rapidly emerging at the intersection of artificial intelligence and behavioral science. As AI systems increasingly shape human experiences—ranging from influencing decision-making on social media to au-tomating tasks in the labor market—behavioral scientists and AI researchers face the challenge of understanding and guiding these interactions toward positive outcomes. Central to this endeavor is the study of complex behaviors exhibited by sophisticated AI models, trained on vast human datasets and iteratively refined through human feedback. A behavioral science built around AI differs from standard behavioral sciences focused on humans, in ways that we detail.
Our discussion centers on three themes that reinforce each other (Figure 1).
The first theme is the pressing need to develop tools for assessing AI’s behavior, given its rapid adoption by individual and corporate users. Since the code and training processes underlying AI are complex and often proprietary, it makes sense to evaluate AI based on its behavior and to ask: What objective is an AI agent implicitly trying to achieve? How will it act in different scenarios with both humans and other AI? Understanding the implicit motives of AI agents is especially important since AI is being developed by many different parties, with varying incentives, and for many different and interacting purposes. The behavioral sciences have been developing methods for assessing behavior in complex social situations and inferring motives for decades, and so they offer a large set of descriptive and diagnostic tools for measurement and prediction. In addition, the social sciences also provide carefully honed normative perspectives about what kinds of behavior can improve or harm human welfare. These “design” methods can help design and optimize AI for individual and social welfare.
2 Figure 1: Three reinforcing pillars of AI Behavioral Science: assessing and guiding AI behavior, using AI to advance behavioral science, and understand-ing AI-human interactions form a mutually reinforcing cycle.
The second theme is that AI can be used as a tool for new and improved techniques to do behavioral and social science research. The enhanced and rapid performance of AI can enable researchers to simulate and predict the behavior of complex systems in new and inexpensive ways. This includes the simulation of individuals, groups, and entire social systems at new scales and with new levels of realism, with low cost and hence low risk. AI also expands and improves the set of models and ways in which human behaviors can be analyzed and categorized. In addition, AI offers a testbed where we can better understand how motivations and objectives shape behavior, providing new insights into human behavior.
The third theme is the need to understand AI and human interactions.
AI is being applied to a rapidly expanding swath of human endeavors. It is changing how children obtain information and write. Experts, from judges to doctors, increasingly rely upon it as a professional tool. AI models underlie the many online platforms that identify and present the information people see and the people with whom they interact. Understanding how that changes human knowledge and behavior is vital, especially as many such systems are being designed by for-profit enterprises that currently internalize neither the 3 externalities nor the public goods nature of information that is at the heart of these interactions. In addition, human-AI interactions take place within entire ecosystems of distinct but layered interactions (e.g., a person getting information from one AI and then sharing it via another on a platform whose information is harvested by other AIs, etc.). The designs tend to have goals within their specific arena, ignoring spillovers to and from the many other layers of interactions. Finally, this technological advancement is occurring at a speed beyond previous breakthroughs, and has a much broader range of applications. Understanding and managing how AI amplifies or shrinks the productivity of humans (“complements” and “substitutes” in economic terms) in various tasks is an important first step. AI’s ultimate impact on wages and employment depends on the broader landscape and general equilibrium effects of where workers are displaced and where more are needed, and the many ripple effects resulting from that displacement. As a particularly radical example of creative destruction, AI has the potential for unusually widespread displacement and unintended consequences that can be better addressed if properly anticipated.
Our outline of AI-Behavioral Science as a field, differs from and com-plements other perspective articles on understanding and using AI. Related research in machine behavior [194] and machine psychology [106] focused primarily on understanding algorithms from the perspective of animal be-havior and human psychology. This has some overlap with what we propose under theme one, but we also provide a discussion of new methods that are needed to address aspects of AI that raise new challenges. Similarly, while computational social science [150] has made significant advances in the study of social behavior with big data and powerful computational methods, AI now enables us to study individual and group behavior in unprecedented ways, taking advantage of aspects of emerging AI models that present new techniques as we outline in theme two. Theme three goes beyond AI alignment [25, 82, 130] and explores human-AI interactions in bilateral and multilateral contexts found throughout the economy and in daily life. Research on the three themes can form a virtuous cycle where greater understanding of the behavior of AI and new insights about human behavior generated from AI tools can better inform studies into complex interactions between humans and AI that can be strategic, long-term, and learning-intensive.
4 AI’s Enhanced Capabilities Before we proceed with these three discussions, it is important to recognize AI’s strengths and capabilities, as they help us understand AI’s potential uses and evolving roles.1 A partial list includes: • Prediction: AI, in the form of multi-layered neural networks, for example, have been shown to be universal function approximators [117], with functions as diverse as the space of human languages, images, video, and more [100, 222]. Also, machine learning techniques are making rapid inroads in statistical modeling (e.g., [24]).
• Power: AI’s computational speed, memory, and ability to handle combinatorics and complex logic already surpass humans in many arenas [151, 206].
• Concentration: AI can handle a heavy workload and repetitive tasks without tiring or losing focus [212, 198, 147].
• Large-scale data digestion: AI can digest vast amounts of data, far exceeding human capabilities. It is adept at filtering, categorizing, and distilling large data sets. It can also monitor and censor data in real time [32, 84].
• Coordination: AI is being trained to communicate with and anticipate the behaviors of others [88, 158].
• Designability: AI can be programmed and optimized for specific tasks [121]. It is also steerable and trainable (reinforceable) in an increasing set of domains [212, 69, 208].
1We take a broad definition of Artificial Intelligence that includes any designed system that includes some aspects of intelligence, where by intelligence we mean perceiving, collecting, processing, categorizing, storing, analyzing, learning from, and acting upon data, as well as performing logical deduction, abstraction, planning, simulation, repetition, and reasoning tasks. Thus AI has a long history, including everything from clocks to automata, and from machine learning and broader statistical techniques to language models, agents, robotics, apps, and platforms. Even though a surge of interest in AI is due to recent advances, and many of our references reflect that, our purpose is to outline a long-term research field related to AI behavior and to avoid a narrow focus that only applies to specific instantiations. This explains our expansive definition of AI.
5 • Predictability: AI can be programmed to provide consistent, trust-worthy, transparent, and reliable behavior [172, 80, 243].
• Self-guidability: AI is developing the capability to monitor and correct its own behavior, including via the use of multi-AI-agent systems [141, 123, 161, 146]. Its ability to try enormous numbers of new combinations and to evaluate and refine the output, enables creativity in a variety of domains .
Figure 2 provides a visualization of these enhanced capabilities. These many features are generally positive, but can also lead to rigidities, biases, and opportunities for manipulation. This is coupled with the fact that many AI systems involve proprietary code and engineering and it can be challenging to see which data they are trained upon. This ‘black-box’ nature of many AI systems can also lead them to be unpredictable in new situations, and calls for external assessment of their properties.
These capabilities also provide the potential for AI to eventually surpass humans in many tasks, especially when paired with other technologies that AI can access and control, with both positive and negative repercussions.
1 Using behavioral science to guide and assess AI A natural interpretation of the field title “AI Behavioral Science” is that it represents the science of AI behavior, which is our first area of discussion.
How can behavioral science principles enhance our ability to evaluate and interpret AI behaviors?
AI surpassed humans in playing Chess and Go some years ago. Its play has revealed new strategies that lie outside of the realm of those typically employed by humans, even at the highest levels.2 This highlights AI’s potential to supplant humans but also demonstrates how it can enhance human behavior.
2For instance, AlphaGo, an AI program developed by Google Deepmind, famously played a move 37 in the second game of Go against Lee Sedol the human champion. Move 37 went against centuries of conventional wisdom about Go strategy, yet led to a victory.
(https://deepmind.google/research/breakthroughs/alphago/) 6 Figure 2: AI’s capabilities across multiple dimensions. Careful design and governance are needed to mitigate risks like bias and unpredictability.
7 Human players have learned from observing AI’s plays, leading to an explosion of novel human strategies in recent years [201].
Beyond entertainment, AI is also emerging in life-altering arenas. It is being deployed to help judges and doctors make decisions [138, 139, 56, 103, 84]. It is already delivering goods [120, 17] and driving people around without direct human supervision [67, 1].
Given these increasingly important roles of AI, we need methods of assessing AI performance, biases, blind spots, and tendencies. We also need to be able to predict its behavior in new situations beyond its experiences and training. As the behavioral sciences have been developing techniques for such diagnoses and predictions for decades, it makes sense to apply them as a primary tool for assessing AI’s behavior. This applies not only to psychological techniques, [105, 36, 89, 205, 145], but also economic ones [168].
For example, we can develop Turing Tests, in which AI is put into various contexts and its behaviors are compared to those of humans.
From its behaviors, one can infer what objective function it acts as if it is maximizing [168]. Whether or not it is actually maximizing such an objective function, as long as it acts as if it is, then that enables one to predict how it will behave both in and out of sample.3 This sort of “revealed preference” analysis has a long tradition in economics and marketing and can be a very useful tool for analyzing and predicting AI behavior.
Behavioral economics has also cataloged a variety of ways in which most humans deviate from self-interested, computationally-unconstrained prefer-ence maximization [48, 132, 148, 86, 40, 193]. For example, humans can have other-regarding preferences, make decisions with limited attention and computational capacity, and have self-control problems. These and other behavioral tendencies cut both ways, in some cases leading to welfare losses and in others to welfare gains compared to the behavioral tendencies of the homo-economicus caricature. Although human behavior can be hard to alter, AI behavior can be steered and thus optimized with prompting and training [232].
Moreover, AI can be designed with the enormous knowledge that has been 3For a recent example, one can ask AI to make choices in classic social or strategic (game) scenarios, where it can decide how much of a sum of money it would like to share, how much it would like to risk, how much it would contribute to a public good, whether it would cooperate in a prisoner’s dilemma, etc. [11, 119, 164, 168, 131] 8 accumulated from the study of normative and welfare economics. For instance, ideas that originated from game theory, such as regret minimization, have been widely adopted in reinforcement learning and have led to breakthroughs in training modern AIs [244, 43]. This presents an opportunity for AI Behavioral Science to have a direct impact on improving AI.
In another direction, behavioral science offers insight into which AI en-coding biases are likely to occur. For instance, social psychologists discovered that people rapidly categorize others—“thin-slicing” [18, 160]—even from just seeing faces, on dimensions such as warmth and competence. AI models appear to do the same: AI-generated CLIP text-image associations of trait dimensions with faces varying in sociodemographics show similar biases [110].
However, it might be much easier to debias the AI than to debias everyday human judgment. For example, given that the data on which some AI are trained are more heavily representative of certain demographics in ways that are measurable, one can reweight to get AI to match the behavior of any particular population of interest [85, 233].
Psychological approaches to understanding personality (e.g., Big 5) and sociological ways of diagnosing societal values can also be used to probe, analyze, and steer AI behaviors in naturalistic contexts, from information sharing and navigation to persuasion and negotiation [137].
More recent work has borrowed constructs and tools from behavioral sci-ences to probe the internal states of AI, such as mental models [95, 159], theory of mind [211], beliefs [111], cognitive processes [70], as well as to evaluate its performance and behavior from various perspectives, such as steerability [69, 170, 55], alignment [99, 204, 224], biases [196, 60], inconsistency[127], decision-making [235], mental accounting [154], humor [112], multiple person-alities [129], algorithmic monoculture [186], rationality [57], altruism [241], pluralism [33], and limitations on predicting out of sample [236, 149]. In eval-uating AI behavior, an important consideration is how AI responses depend on context. Another important factor is prompt sensitivity: AI outputs can vary significantly depending on the wording, language, and framing of the input [57, 99]. Having AI adapt to context is desirable in some applications, but not in others. Thus, when and why AI is malleable becomes a relevant dimension of AI evaluations.4 4Given the large set of tests that it is important to test upon, designing methods that most efficiently select what to test can become important [217].
9 Given that AI is often developed by entities with objectives other than overall social welfare and the fact that there are generally externalities involved in AI behavior, this is also an area where behavioral assessment of various forms of AI can be an important tool in the hands of regulators. This focus on social welfare can be a great asset to AI behavioral Science.
This is an area of science that is in its infancy. It will likely develop quickly for two reasons: One is that AI is advancing quickly in the wild, and so there is a significant social need to assess its many instances. The other is that AI itself can be used as a tool in its assessment and monitoring. This is an exciting new facet: how can AI best be used to understand, guide, and police AI?
2 AI as a new tool in the behavioral sciences Our second area of discussion is a sort of an inverse of our first: instead of asking how behavioral sciences can help understand AI, we ask how AI can help understand behavior and how AI can transform behavioral science research. How can understanding AI behaviors provide deeper insights into human decision-making processes, behaviors, and interactions?
Of course, as we acknowledged above, AI models have computational and data processing capabilities that make them obvious tools across all sciences, and indeed, AI is making rapid inroads as a tool for language processing, complex system simulation, pattern recognition, categorization, and even logic and mathematics [42, 152, 20]. Let us discuss how uses of AI go beyond simply offering faster and larger computations.
AI offers methods of quantifying and analyzing large amounts of qualitative data including discussions, pictures, writings, videos, that would be hard to otherwise analyze. Such techniques have been used in a range for research, from quantifying text and speech [94], to distilling historical records [104], and analyzing human behavior in videos [199]. This permits analysis of human behaviors in ways not previous available.
The success of large language models (LLMs) in simulating humans makes possible a range of powerful social scientific applications, as such models can generate digital proxies of humans, enabling rich and complex social and behavioral science to be done in silico [119, 164, 62, 102]. While the challenges 10 of such an approach have been pointed out in a number of studies [23, 2, 20, 169, 38], recent studies find that properly prompted LLMs can simulate human participants’ responses to survey questions and in experimental studies with high accuracy [74, 23, 209, 231, 232, 113]. This provided a breakthrough, which can transform agent-based modeling from simple lines of code tailored for specific contexts to be much richer and broadly applicable [116, 73, 27].
On the other hand, AI agents that can mimic human respondents also pose a challenge to online survey research [227].
Simulating human-like respondents is appealing for a variety of reasons.
The first and most obvious benefit of AI for simulating social and economic systems is that one can study how a particular system depends on behavior of the people or agents interacting within it. It allows one to test and control variations that may be difficult or unobservable in the wild. One can see how a system changes with differences in the behaviors of those within it, mapping out a complex systems behavior in a wide variety of circumstances.
This can be used for counterfactual estimation and become a sort of “wind tunnel” (testbed) for policy design (e.g., [133]).
A second obvious benefit is accessibility. LLMs can be prompted quickly, cheaply, and easily. An automated survey can be fielded in a day for a few hundred dollars, and a single interview can be simulated in a few seconds for pennies [93].
Third, studies using simulated respondents can be conducted at a scale that is infeasible with human subjects. Analysts can run millions of interactions initialized across a great number of experimental conditions, characterizing a high-dimensional space of estimated (causal) effects in detail [136, 13].
Fourth, human subjects who are difficult to interview in person, such as hard-to-reach, minority populations, or medical, political, or economic elites, can be simulated, leveraging extensive textual and behavioral records [11, 192, 167]. Simulating unlikely conversations between leaders in science, politics, industry, and technology can produce insight into intellectual or ideological exchanges that rarely happen naturally and could not be produced in a laboratory setting. Simulated subjects therefore make feasible a wide variety of research designs that would be impractical or impossible with human populations [23, 119, 200, 29, 143, 220, 37, 142, 233].
To summarize these emerging applications of AI as a tool in behavioral 11 science, we provide a conceptual illustration (Figure 3).
Nevertheless, there are reasons to proceed with caution. Some studies (e.g., [182]) have found that some models do not generate sufficient variation to match the variety of sociodemographic characteristics, for example, in synthetic datasets. Various AI-based models have difficulties generalizing to novel out-of-sample contexts after closely matching human behavior within a particular context [163]. Out of sample behavior is a challenge for any model, but can be particularly poignant when AI is being applied in enormous numbers of tasks and settings for which it was not particularly trained or designed.
AI can also be used to pilot and predict empirical research outcomes, such as experimental treatment effects, either (a) indirectly, via the simulation of samples of experimental participants across different experimental conditions [113], or (b) directly, based on the model’s response to a prompt including a description of the research design [155]. This is feasible even for human actions that have been traditionally difficult to simulate. Predictions of empirical research outcomes fill multiple roles in the behavioral sciences [108, 77, 72]. There remain concerns about whether AI-simulated subjects accurately match variation and co-variation of behavior sampled from human populations [23, 2, 113, 144], and this should continue to evolve as AI is enhanced and enters more complex and intricate simulation arenas. Outside of experiments, AI can mass produce many papers on a single research question such as stock return predictability [179] by mining potential predictors from the existing literature and using the appropriate criteria and benchmarks to select a subset for generating plausible theoretical justifications.
AI-assisted predictions of the results in an experiment can also be valuable for the interpretation of observed results [72, 220, 54]. It can identify con-sensus and sources of disagreement between different forecaster cohorts (e.g.
laypersons, experts, AI) and forecasting methods (e.g. AI simulations and AI predictions). Ex-ante predictions can also inform decision-making in the context of experimental designs and resource allocation, which is particularly beneficial for ‘mega-studies’ that coordinate multiple research groups across multiple research designs or experimental interventions [171], because AI can provide predictions for large spaces of feasible experimental designs with high accuracy [113]. As AI-derived estimates of experimental (i.e., causal) effects in controlled settings become more accurate, it allows behavioral scientists 12 Figure 3: Key applications of AI in advancing behavioral science, including simulating participants, predicting experimental outcomes, assisting with experimental design, detecting and reducing biases, analyzing data, and enabling the discovery of new theories and models.
13 to build richer models. This raises the question of how to build models well from large amounts of high quality, experimental data, a problem for which different approaches have been proposed [188, 13]. Over-fitting models on simulated data is a concern, as in many settings, requiring out of sample testing.
Finally, predictions about the replicability and generalizability of published studies play an important role in the post-publication assessment of published research [49, 12], with numerous computational approaches emerging in this space [237, 52, 238, 184, 221].
Looking forward, AI technology can potentially drive positive behavioral change by leveraging digital tools to precisely identify individual biases, design targeted nudges, deliver personalized interventions at scale, and broadly automate the practices of behavioral science research [175, 59]. Recent efforts demonstrate the potential for building behavioral foundation models that are jointly trained on datasets and tasks related to these applications and extrapolate to a wide variety of new uses [233]. Generative agents [185, 184] that simulate human behavior can be placed in various environments to understand consumer behavior, for example.
Beyond its use as a tool in improving existing behavioral science techniques and enabling one to expand the scope and scale of analysis, AI can also provide a whole new technique for assessing human behaviors and motivations. There are many reasons for which human rationalizations of their own behaviors are biased and unreliable [87, 191, 21, 68]. AI has two advantages here.
One is that it has been trained on enormous amounts of data and thus has learned from experiences and information across a broad spectrum of human behaviors. The other is that AI is more transparent to measure in terms of how it responds to contexts. For instance, which instructions (in terms of motivations) does one have to give to AI in order to get it to behave similarly to some particular human behavior in a public goods or risk game? Such techniques show promise in terms of learning new things about why humans exhibit certain patterns of behavior, and what might explain differences between populations with varying demographics [232].
More generally, understanding what it takes (in terms of background data and steering) to get AI to behave in some particular way in some social or economic context, helps us better understand that context; and ultimately helps us categorize and contrast contexts [232].
14 Another value of AI for doing behavioral science is contrasting what AI is good at with human weaknesses, to characterize human judgment that does not respect the AI discipline. As an example, useful machine learning models have the advantage of trawling through large numbers of features to predict outcomes. But that advantage risks overfitting, so some ML models respect the bias-variance tradeoff: They tolerate bias in estimating feature strength, in order to reduce overfitting variance. It is likely that human judgment does not respect the bias-variance tradeoff in the same way that AI models do. Human judgments can sometimes espouse confidence about high-order variable interactions, which are notoriously difficult to estimate reliably, and typically result in overfitting [178, 197, 28], which ML models provide ways to guard against.
3 Human-AI interaction Our third area of discussion concerns the fact that the extensive deployment of AI means that most social and economic systems are no longer simply human systems within the confines of some organization or institutions, but are now systems of interacting humans and AI agents. Behavioral sciences have long studied human interactions, including how they are shaped by the various institutions and organizations humans have developed. We are now faced with a world in which humans are not just interacting with each other and through institutions, but are interacting with various forms and layers of AI. AI guides the information that people get and with whom they interact.
It can influence how people vote, how they do their jobs, how they educate themselves, and what they do in their spare time. AI Behavioral Science includes the study of complex and multi-layered interactions between humans and AI in a variety of contexts. This involves modeling and understanding such interactions, as well as taking a normative approach of envisioning the future of human-AI collaboration to maximize benefits for society [218].
There are three areas of important science here. The first concerns where and how AI will be interacting with humans, how we study these new and evolving systems, and what issues are important to address. The second is that AI brings with it a technological leap that has the potential to both improve and disrupt our societies on a larger scale and more rapidly than previous innovations. How do we best anticipate and manage these challenges? The 15 third is the actual development of AI itself, which involves massive investments from various sources with differing objectives and interests. How do we deal with the fact that much of the development is based on profits rather than social welfare? How do we avoid having systematically biased surrogates?5 3.1 Behavioral Consequences of AI-Human Interac-tions We begin with a discussion of some of the new arenas in which AI will be interacting with humans and some of the associated issues.
One type of interaction is in helping people “improve” their behaviors.
AI technology can drive positive behavioral change by leveraging digital tools to precisely identify individual biases, design targeted nudges, and deliver personalized interventions at scale [91]. Advanced data analytics and multimodal behavioral insights enable more accurate bias detection than traditional methods, while AI-powered decision systems can holistically address multiple cognitive biases simultaneously and optimize decisions across domains - a fundamental shift from traditional decision-by-decision nudging.
Crucially, AI enables dynamic personalization—moving beyond one-size-fits-all nudges to tailor interventions based on individual heterogeneity, fostering deeper collaboration between behavioral science and digital innovation for scalable impact [63, 47].
AI also shows promise in providing emotional support, especially in areas like mental health and education [239, 181]. Its lack of personal judgment or emotional bias makes it an uniquely non-judgmental and potentially unbi-ased listener, possibly even more empathetic when properly trained. This is especially valuable in contexts where people fear stigma. Unlike traditional therapy, AI support is low-cost, always available, and highly accessible. Chal-lenges lie in preventing users from becoming overly emotionally dependent, as well as ensuring AI responses promote healthier human behaviors rather than reinforcing stigmas and stereotypes [173]. Understanding the dynamics of these interactions requires new research on how humans form beliefs and mental models about the beliefs and mental models AIs have of them [162].
5One striking example was the demonstration that a U.S. health insurance reimbursement algorithm required African Americans to be sicker than their white counterparts to receive the same level of authorized care [180].
16 A well-designed emotional support AI could ultimately help people become better humans—more emotionally self-sufficient, self-healing, and empathetic.
Technologies like Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) can further support this by allowing users to immerse themselves in others’ per-spectives and decision-making contexts. Meanwhile, advanced AI systems may help visualize the broader social impact of personal choices, encouraging users to reflect on consequences and develop deeper empathy.
Along with the potential benefits, there are also concerns that AI could lead to loss of skills, reduce learning, or lead to emotional dependence or addiction [177, 8].
Evidence from hiring reveals two enduring lessons about human-AI col-laboration. First, well-designed algorithms can raise efficiency and equity: recommender systems shorten time-to-fill vacancies [118], algorithmic inter-view filters increase acceptance rates and subsequent productivity [65], and AI-generated candidate scores help recruiters advance women in STEM [26]6.
Second, human behaviors impact whether those gains materialize: managers who discount machine advice make worse hires [114], while AI drafting tools induce more, but lower-quality, job posts without better matches [228, 229].
In a natural field experiment, [125] provide evidence on how real-time voice AI agents reshape incentives, bias, and complementarities in labor markets.
AI has also been reshaping how people learn social and other skills by enabling interactive, low-risk environments for practicing complex skills.
Especially with social simulation, AI can be customized to imitate a variety of specific individuals and idiosyncratic behaviors. This opens up possibilities for people to learn in low-stakes artificial contexts where they interact with AI rather than other humans.7 The AI Partner and AI Mentor framework [234] proposed using AI for social skill training by using simulated practice for experiential learning and by using simulated AI mentors to offer personalized 6An overview of AI’s function in recruitment (candidate sourcing) and selection (candi-date evaluation) is provided by K¨ ochling and Wehner [140]. Building upon this work, Will et al. [230] find that AI generally equals or exceeds human recruiters in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.
7This has some parallels to other arenas in which AI is enabling new knowledge. For example, in discovering new drugs to fight cancer and other diseases, not only can AI help model and develop new drugs, but it can simulate how they will work in humans without actually testing drugs on real humans, providing a much faster and lower cost step in testing and learning [39].
17 feedback based on domain expertise and factual knowledge. Here, AI-based simulation allows for repeated, adaptive, and individualized experiences, which are especially valuable in domains that involve communication and interpersonal dynamics.
A growing body of work demonstrates how AI’s capabilities can be applied across much wider domains of human-AI interactions. The potential of human-AI interaction is emerging in the context of education, science, interviews, groups and experts, managing risk, law enforcement, medicine, and creative arts [214, 98, 213].
It has been shown that LLM dialogues can reduce conspiracy theorizing [64], and LLMs can facilitate compromise in highly polarized groups [215].
In education, an AI was used to simulate a programming course in which simulated students made mistakes and asked questions like real students, allowing novice TAs to practice across a wide range of student behaviors [166]. TutorCopilot [223] offered real-time support to tutors based on expert guidance. In social learning, Rehearsal [202] helped users practice conflict resolution by simulating difficult conversations, while [22] used AI to provide feedback on politeness and discourse strategies to foster constructive political dialogue. In mental health, [157] and [122] created simulated patients and AI supervisors that allow counselors to train across a range of scenarios. Overall, these efforts highlight the emerging role of AI as a tool for training and feedback, marking a key expansion from an information provider to a partner and collaborator in human learning.
All these cases reveal that AI can change how people learn, which raises profound research questions that may reshape educational theory and practice for decades to come [240, 109]. First, how does AI assistance differentially impact human cognitive development across various contexts [153, 31], and under what conditions can AI match or outperform human instructors in educational effectiveness? Second, given that students may interact differently with AI compared to how they interact with human instructors, existing learn-ing science theories may or may not be applicable to AI tutors [156]. What novel theoretical paradigms might better capture and explain these distinctive AI-mediated learning relationships? Third, how might we optimally integrate human pedagogical expertise with AI capabilities to create next-generation teaching practices? Preliminary research suggests promising complementari-ties when incorporating teacher expertise and AI tutor instructional design 18 [92], pointing toward hybrid educational models that leverage the strengths of both humans and AI.
As the transformative potential of generative AI reshapes the breadth and depth of human-AI interaction, understanding the psychological and social consequences of these interactions on human participants has become critically important. Beyond the extensive efforts that highlight productivity and creativity gains from AI assistance [58, 46], recent findings highlight concerning patterns on human well-being, e.g. high-intensity users demonstrate increased emotional dependence and reduced socialization [189]. In addition to usage volume, interaction modes can significantly impact human perceptions of themselves: when LLMs initiate human-AI co-writing processes, users report diminished perceived autonomy and self-efficacy compared to human-first approaches where humans create initial drafts before requesting LLM revisions [195]. These early signals suggest research could expand beyond performance metrics to develop nuanced frameworks for healthy and sustainable human-AI relationships that preserve, if not enhance, psychological well-being, social connection, and human autonomy. We anticipate increased investigation into how interaction design, usage patterns, and contextual factors might foster beneficial rather than detrimental psychological outcomes as these systems become increasingly embedded in daily life.
Despite the enthusiasm about human-AI complementarity, recent literature also highlights several potential concerns. For example, worker well-being can erode when AI decision assistants become “digital overseers,” raising stress and diminishing perceived autonomy [128, 66]. As many AI models are trained with the objective of defeating human players or achieving superhuman performance [207], their behavior in real-world scenarios may set humans up for failure. In scenarios like autonomous driving, the AI often turns the human into a last-resort fallback who must intervene only during rare, dangerous edge cases [107, 225]. In fact, even perfect hand-offs cannot solve fundamental communication and persuasion limits, and the inefficiency of processing such information may lead to human operators routinely discounting or over-trusting the algorithms [101, 51]. Recent empirical results and developments in impossibility theorems have highlighted these “no-free-lunch” limits of AI interpretability or human-AI complementarity [76, 30, 75, 187, 8].
It is already clear that humans act differently when interacting with AI than with other humans [203, 174, 96, 97] though humans may tend to 19 evaluate AIs using the same frameworks at times[78]. On the one hand, AI may be thought of as being less judgmental than other humans. On the other hand, it might also be less capable of being empathetic in particular situations where other humans may have ample experience. There are also questions of confidentiality and security, as we already know things that are shared on social media can become widely public quickly. Understanding the evolving interactions and how they change how humans behave[16, 15], and when they can lead to overall improvements in behavior, is an important frontier [50, 53, 135]. There are many different arenas in which the role of AI will be different, so understanding how the context in question impacts the emerging behavior is vital. These are areas in which the modeling of games and other complex systems in the behavioral sciences can be leveraged[79].
One aspect of this that deserves particular attention is that humans and AI interact in more than just one context at a time. For example, people may use AI as a tool for gathering information but then interact on an AI-guided platform, which then shapes team production. These interact with other parts of a society or economy. Effectively, AI and humans are interacting across many layers and contexts to produce whole ecosystems. Analyzing each part in isolation can miss important interactive features and weaknesses due to systemic properties. The study of such ecosystems may involve the development of new game theory and other behavioral science tools.8 In particular, the basic idea of “assessing AI” while referring to AI as a single entity can be a source of significant loss in social welfare. In realistic ecosystems, different AI agents with different designs and capabilities take many roles, and the alignment between these AI agents, as well as with humans with whom they interact, is essential. This is already evident in the dramatically changing search/question answering systems, central to our life, where there are AI agents in the ranker, query formulation, and document generation parts of the information retrieval ecosystem, and issues of alignment of these agents are crucial for overall social welfare [176]. The above can be associated with a more general view of AI ecosystems, consisting of producers, consumers, and market makers, where each component may involve a different form of AI agent (or a human agent), and the alignment of 8It is also proving to be useful to use combinations of AI together, much as humans might use teams whose members have different expertise to solve a problem (e.g., [183]).
Multimember teams of AI can police each other, query each other, refine each other’s perspectives, and do other things that help provide improved collective behavior.
20 Figure 4: Key layers of the human–AI ecosystem: AI as personalized assistants or collaborators at the individual level, as agents and systems embedded within organizations, and embedded in many interacting layers in broad societal ecosystems. AI’s applications extend beyond those listed.
components may be crucial for the overall ecosystem behavior (Figure 4).
3.2 AI’s Economic Impact Next, let us discuss the science of how AI will change societies. The accelera-tion in AI’s emergence gives rise to a need for (new) economic insights on how AI will transform the global and local economies. As mentioned above, AI’s capabilities lead many to predict that they will surpass humans at any purely cognitive task in the near future, with the remainder of tasks eventually 21 to follow. Forms of AI have already displaced labor in a variety of arenas [45], from accountants to travel agents. It has dramatically altered the retail shopping industry and is poised to do the same in the driving/transportation industry. It shows promise in new areas, for instance, dramatically outper-forming analysts in picking stock portfolios [71]. This does not necessarily mean that AI will replace humans in all economic activities especially given sociological barriers to adoption[14], but it does suggest the potential for large declines in the relative importance of human labor in production of goods and information and across much wider parts of the economy than previous technological transformations [124, 8].
At least for the medium term, the economic concept of comparative advantage provides many insights. Even if one mode of production (non-human) has an absolute advantage on all or most tasks, as long as it is not free, prices and wages adjust so that the less-productive mode (human labor) is still used where it has the best relative advantage. Tasks that are least amenable to the list of AI capabilities above, for instance, are those that are constantly changing and presenting new challenges, require dexterity, etc. These face the least pressure for displacement. For instance, it could be that doctors, whose main task is providing diagnoses from a list of symptoms and prescribing treatments, are displaced in greater numbers than nurse practitioners, who have many tasks that require human dexterity (for instance, inserting a needle into a vein or helping an injured patient shower).
Figure 5 illustrates how successive technological waves, from agricultural mechanization to manufacturing automation to AI, have displaced labor, created new jobs, with mixed implications, with AI having a potential for an unusually broad and fast disruption [165, 7, 44, 81, 10].
The potential for AI to change the way labor is deployed around the economy is much larger in both scale and scope than previous technological advances, with at least 46% of US jobs already exposed to significant changes [81]. A recent study of jobs in Chile finds that at least 80 percent of workers are in jobs in which generative AI could accelerate at least 30 percent of their tasks [226]. History suggests that such changes, coupled with growth in productivity, can be disruptive and lead to increases in inequality. For instance, the displacement of labor in agriculture and later in manufacturing led to pockets of severe poverty in the US and in other countries around the world during the periods in which such advances were most rapid in 22 Figure 5: Major technological waves have led to both labor displacement and new job creation, with uneven economic implications. Learning from past technological advancements can help optimize the benefits and the minimization of disruptive costs.
23 Figure 6: Contrasting roles of AI integration into the workforce: replacing human labor vs. enhancing human capabilities and creating new ones. En-abling widespread benefits requires thoughtful design and guidance.
24 each economy. In 1900, fifteen percent of the US population (11.7 million) worked in the cultivation of crops, livestock production, forestry, hunting, and fishing, while by 2019 it was less than one percent (2.3 million), with a much higher total (real adjusted) value of production.9 This involved generations of migration from rural to suburban and urban areas and different careers. Dramatic drops in employment since the 1980s have occurred in manufacturing losing more than 1/3 of its employment, while employment in business, education and health services have more than tripled since the 1980s.10 As a result, some studies have attributed over half the increase in US wage inequality since 1980 to the automation of routine task-intensive jobs [7].
There are many views about the macroeconomic impact of the newest wave of technologies including AI and various forms of robotics and automation [6, 126, 190]. A model focused solely on the automation potential of current AI finds it will contribute less than one percentage point to economic growth over the next decade [5], while models emphasizing positive feedback between AI investments and the ease of future scientific innovations anticipate a large transformation of the economy, with much larger global growth rates [9, 3, 83].
While accurately predicting technological development and deployment over decades may be impossible, models for scenario planning can help guide policy as uncertainty is resolved [41]. For example, ongoing research builds on agent-based computable general equilibrium overlapping generations models to understand the interaction of government tax, trade, and regulatory policy with technological innovations in creating macroeconomic and distributional outcomes [34, 35]. AI tools will also be useful in improving and accelerating the development of these models: neoclassical agents may be replaced with AI ones which have more realistic behaviors and can handle strategic situations; surrogate AI models of the simulation will speed model development and testing; and AI based prediction tools can be married to structural projections to retain the best features of both.
Anticipating disruptions and identifying occupations and regions that will be most severely impacted [19] can help steer government fiscal, regulatory, and education policy and minimize the damage of such ‘creative destruction’ 9Our World in Data based on the primary dataset on labor force participation, published by the International Labor Organization (via the World Bank).
10For example, see Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Forty years of falling manufacturing employment”, Beyond the Statistics, November 2020,Vol. 9, No. 16.
25 and guide the development and deployment of AI to the most beneficial paths.
For example, policymakers must avoid the “Turing Trap”: the economic pitfall that arises when innovators overly focus their research and development on building human-like AIs that substitute for workers rather than augmenting them. Investment that flows into AI that is designed entirely to replace humans can widen wage inequality and leave vast reserves of untapped productivity on the table. Redirecting incentives toward complementary, human-enhancing AI can help society escape the trap and ensure that the gains from AI are widely shared [44]. There is evidence that new AI technologies are doing both (e.g., [242, 115, 61]).
3.3 AI Production Finally, we briefly mention that is important to understand is the actual production of AI itself [90]. The brevity of this discussion is not because of a lack of importance, but because of the rapid emergence of this as a topic.
Traditional industrial organization studies [216, 219] offer substantial insight, but the details of this new industry are complex and unique. The potential profits from various applications are enormous, which is attracting massive amounts of investment. Much of the development is by private parties who wish to keep the design details private. Given that the designers’ objectives and those of society may not align (e.g., designing systems that maximize human engagement and emotional response rather than learning and welfare), it is essential to understand the economics, profitability, incentives, legality, and ethics of AI production [134, 210]. The economies of scope and scale, as well as the network externalities involved with AI, can lead to inefficient market-based outcomes [4]. Technology is emerging at a much faster rate than we can comprehend, and across various governmental jurisdictions, making this another area in urgent need of study.
4 Discussion Science is not always efficient. Given that it involves synergies and comple-mentarities between different researchers, teams, and the public and private sectors, it exhibits the characteristics of a coordination game and is rife with externalities. It also provides public goods, as the generated knowledge can be 26 shared broadly. Given these features, neither markets nor a set of disparate private and public institutions, such as universities, will lead to sufficient levels of scientific discovery. Nor do they efficiently solve the coordination problem. Thus, it can be useful to help guide and fertilize science. As the new field of “AI Behavioral Science” is emerging rapidly and organically, the purpose of this article is to facilitate coordination by identifying and discussing key areas of focus, both in terms of foundations and potential policies.
27 References [1] Abdel-Aty, Mohamed, and Shengxuan Ding. 2024. “A matched case-control analysis of autonomous vs human-driven vehicle accidents.” Nature communications, 15(1): 4931.
[2] Abdurahman, Suhaib, Mohammad Atari, Farzan Karimi-Malekabadi, Mona J Xue, Jackson Trager, Peter S Park, Preni Golazizian, Ali Omrani, and Morteza Dehghani. 2024. “Perils and opportunities in using large language models in psychological research.” PNAS nexus, 3(7): pgae245.
[3] Abis, Simona, and Laura Veldkamp. 2024. “The changing economics of knowledge production.” The Review of Financial Studies, 37(1): 89– 118.
[4] Acemoglu, Daron. 2021. “Harms of AI.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[5] Acemoglu, Daron. 2025. “The simple macroeconomics of AI.” Eco-nomic Policy, 40(121): 13–58.
[6] Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. “Artificial intelli-gence, automation, and work.” In The economics of artificial intelligence: An agenda. 197–236. University of Chicago Press.
[7] Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2022. “Tasks, automation, and the rise in US wage inequality.” Econometrica, 90(5): 1973–2016.
[8] Acemoglu, Daron, Dingwen Kong, and Asuman Ozdaglar. 2026.
“AI, human cognition and knowledge collapse.” National Bureau of Eco-nomic Research.
[9] Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin F Jones, and Charles I Jones.
2017. “Artificial intelligence and economic growth.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[10] Aghion, Philippe, Simon Bunel, Xavier Jaravel, Thomas Mikaelsen, Alexandra Roulet, and Jakob Søgaard. 2025. “How different uses of AI shape labor demand: evidence from France.” Vol.
28 115, 62–67, American Economic Association 2014 Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203.
[11] Aher, Gati V, Rosa I Arriaga, and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2023.
“Using large language models to simulate multiple humans and replicate human subject studies.” 337–371, PMLR.
[12] Alipourfard, Nazanin, Beatrix Arendt, Daniel M Benjamin, Noam Benkler, Michael Bishop, Mark Burstein, Martin Bush, James Caverlee, Yiling Chen, Chae Clark, et al. 2021. “System-atizing confidence in open research and evidence (SCORE).” SocArXiv.
[13] Almaatouq, Abdullah, Thomas L Griffiths, Jordan W Suchow, Mark E Whiting, James Evans, and Duncan J Watts. 2024.
“Beyond playing 20 questions with nature: Integrative experiment design in the social and behavioral sciences.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 47: e33.
[14] Almog, David. 2025. “Barriers to AI Adoption: Image Concerns at Work.” [15] Almog, David, Lucas Lippman, and Daniel Martin. 2026. “When an AI Judges Your Work: The Hidden Costs of Algorithmic Assessment.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02076.
[16] Almog, David, Romain Gauriot, Daniel Martin, and Lionel Page. 2026. “Human Responses to AI Oversight: Evidence from Centre Court.” [17] Alverhed, Elin, Simon Hellgren, Hanna Isaksson, Lisa Olsson, Hanna Palmqvist, and Jonas Flod´ en. 2024. “Autonomous last-mile delivery robots: a literature review.” European Transport Research Review, 16(1): 4.
[18] Ambady, Nalini, and Robert Rosenthal. 1992. “Thin slices of expressive behavior as predictors of interpersonal consequences: A meta-analysis.” Psychological bulletin, 111(2): 256.
[19] Andreadis, Lefteris, Eleni Kalotychou, Manolis Chatzikonstanti-nou, Christodoulos Louca, and Christos A Makridis. 2025. “Local Heterogeneity in Artificial Intelligence Jobs over Time and Space.” Vol.
29 115, 29–34, American Economic Association 2014 Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203.
[20] Anthis, Jacy Reese, Ryan Liu, Sean M Richardson, Austin C Kozlowski, Bernard Koch, Erik Brynjolfsson, James Evans, and Michael S Bernstein. 2025. “Position: Llm social simulations are a promising research method.” [21] Antin, Judd, and Aaron Shaw. 2012. “Social desirability bias and self-reports of motivation: a study of amazon mechanical turk in the US and India.” 2925–2934.
[22] Argyle, Lisa P, Christopher A Bail, Ethan C Busby, Joshua R Gubler, Thomas Howe, Christopher Rytting, Taylor Sorensen, and David Wingate. 2023a. “Leveraging AI for democratic discourse: Chat interventions can improve online political conversations at scale.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(41): e2311627120.
[23] Argyle, Lisa P, Ethan C Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David Wingate. 2023b. “Out of one, many: Using language models to simulate human samples.” Political Analysis, 31(3): 337–351.
[24] Athey, Susan, and Guido W Imbens. 2019. “Machine learning meth-ods that economists should know about.” Annual Review of Economics, 11(1): 685–725.
[25] Autor, David, Andrew Caplin, Daniel J Martin, and Philip Marx. 2025. “Misaligned by Design: Incentive Failures in Machine Learning.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[26] Avery, Mallory, Andreas Leibbrandt, and Joseph Vecci. 2024.
“Does artificial intelligence help or hurt gender diversity? Evidence from two field experiments on recruitment in tech.” [27] Axtell, Robert L, and J Doyne Farmer. 2025. “Agent-based mod-eling in economics and finance: Past, present, and future.” Journal of Economic Literature, 63(1): 197–287.
30 [28] Babyak, Michael A. 2004. “What you see may not be what you get: a brief, nontechnical introduction to overfitting in regression-type models.” Biopsychosocial Science and Medicine, 66(3): 411–421.
[29] Bail, Christopher A. 2024. “Can Generative AI improve social science?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(21): e2314021121.
[30] Bansal, Gagan, Tongshuang Wu, Joyce Zhou, Raymond Fok, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Daniel Weld. 2021. “Does the whole exceed its parts? the effect of ai explana-tions on complementary team performance.” 1–16.
[31] Bastani, Hamsa, Osbert Bastani, Alp Sungu, Haosen Ge, ¨ Ozge Kabakci, and Rei Mariman. 2025. “Generative AI without guardrails can harm learning: Evidence from high school mathematics.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(26).
[32] Bengio, Yoshua, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. 2013.
“Representation learning: A review and new perspectives.” IEEE trans-actions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8): 1798–1828.
[33] Benkler, Noam, Drisana Mosaphir, Scott Friedman, Andrew Smart, and Sonja Schmer-Galunder. 2023. “Assessing llms for moral value pluralism.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10075.
[34] Benzell, Seth G, Laurence J Kotlikoff, Guillermo LaGarda, and Victor Yifan Ye. 2021. “Simulating endogenous global automation.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[35] Benzell, Seth Gordon, and Victor Yifan Ye. 2024. “Simulating the Global Effect of Transformative AI: Growth, Welfare, Economic Power, and Policy Responses.” [36] Binz, Marcel, and Eric Schulz. 2023. “Using cognitive psychology to understand GPT-3.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(6): e2218523120.
[37] Binz, Marcel, Elif Akata, Matthias Bethge, Franziska Br¨ andle, Fred Callaway, Julian Coda-Forno, Peter Dayan, Can Demircan, Maria K Eckstein, No´ emi ´ Eltet˝ o, et al. 2025. “A foundation model to predict and capture human cognition.” Nature, 1–8.
31 [38] Bisbee, James, Joshua D Clinton, Cassy Dorff, Brenton Kenkel, and Jennifer M Larson. 2024. “Synthetic replacements for human survey data? The perils of large language models.” Political Analysis, 32(4): 401–416.
[39] Blanco-Gonzalez, Alexandre, Alfonso Cabezon, Alejandro Seco-Gonzalez, Daniel Conde-Torres, Paula Antelo-Riveiro, Angel Pineiro, and Rebeca Garcia-Fandino. 2023. “The role of AI in drug discovery: challenges, opportunities, and strategies.” Pharmaceuticals, 16(6): 891.
[40] Bolton, Gary E, and Axel Ockenfels. 2000. “ERC: A theory of equity, reciprocity, and competition.” American economic review, 91(1): 166–193.
[41] Bommasani, Rishi, Sanjeev Arora, Jennifer Chayes, Yejin Choi, Mariano-Florentino Cu´ ellar, Li Fei-Fei, Daniel E Ho, Dan Ju-rafsky, Sanmi Koyejo, Hima Lakkaraju, et al. 2025. “Advancing science-and evidence-based AI policy.” Science, 389(6759): 459–461.
[42] Broska, David, Michael Howes, and Austin van Loon. 2024.
“The Mixed Subjects Design: Treating Large Language Models as Po-tentially Informative Observations.” Sociological Methods & Research, 00491241251326865.
[43] Brown, Noam, and Tuomas Sandholm. 2019. “Superhuman AI for multiplayer poker.” Science, 365(6456): 885–890.
[44] Brynjolfsson, Erik. 2022. “The turing trap: The promise & peril of human-like artificial intelligence.” Daedalus, 151(2): 272–287.
[45] Brynjolfsson, Erik, Bharat Chandar, and Ruyu Chen. 2025.
“Canaries in the Coal Mine? Six Facts about the Recent Employment Effects of Artificial Intelligence.” Stanford Digital Economy Lab.
[46] Brynjolfsson, Erik, Danielle Li, and Lindsey Raymond. 2025.
“Generative AI at work.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, qjae044.
[47] Burton, Jason W, Ezequiel Lopez-Lopez, Shahar Hechtlinger, Zoe Rahwan, Samuel Aeschbach, Michiel A Bakker, Joshua A Becker, Aleks Berditchevskaia, Julian Berger, Levin Brinkmann, 32 et al. 2024. “How large language models can reshape collective intelli-gence.” Nature human behaviour, 8(9): 1643–1655.
[48] Camerer, Colin F. 2003. Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton university press.
[49] Camerer, Colin F, Anna Dreber, Felix Holzmeister, Teck-Hua Ho, J¨ urgen Huber, Magnus Johannesson, Michael Kirchler, Gideon Nave, Brian A Nosek, Thomas Pfeiffer, et al. 2018.
“Evaluating the replicability of social science experiments in Nature and Science between 2010 and 2015.” Nature human behaviour, 2(9): 637–644.
[50] Caplin, Andrew, David Deming, Shangwen Li, Daniel Martin, Philip Marx, Ben Weidmann, and Kadachi Jiada Ye. 2025. “The ABC’s of Who Benefits from Working with AI: Ability, Beliefs, and Calibration.” Management Science.
[51] Carton, Samuel, Qiaozhu Mei, and Paul Resnick. 2020. “Feature-based explanations don’t help people detect misclassifications of online toxicity.” Vol. 14, 95–106.
[52] Chakravorti, Tatiana, Robert Fraleigh, Timothy Fritton, Michael McLaughlin, Vaibhav Singh, Christopher Griffin, An-thony Kwasnica, David Pennock, C Lee Giles, and Sarah Ra-jtmajer. 2023. “A prototype hybrid prediction market for estimating replicability of published work.” In HHAI 2023: Augmenting Human Intellect. 300–309. IOS Press.
[53] Chan, Alex. 2026. “Preference for Explainable AI (XAI).” Working paper, Harvard Business School.
[54] Charness, Gary, Brian Jabarian, and John A List. 2025. “The next generation of experimental research with LLMs.” Nature Human Behaviour, 1–3.
[55] Chen, Kai, Zihao He, Taiwei Shi, and Kristina Lerman. 2025a.
“STEER-BENCH: A Benchmark for Evaluating the Steerability of Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20645.
[56] Chen, Richard J, Judy J Wang, Drew FK Williamson, Tiffany Y Chen, Jana Lipkova, Ming Y Lu, Sharifa Sahai, and Faisal 33 Mahmood. 2023a. “Algorithmic fairness in artificial intelligence for medicine and healthcare.” Nature biomedical engineering, 7(6): 719–742.
[57] Chen, Yiting, Tracy Xiao Liu, You Shan, and Songfa Zhong.
2023b. “The emergence of economic rationality of GPT.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(51): e2316205120.
[58] Chen, Zenan, and Jason Chan. 2024. “Large language model in creative work: The role of collaboration modality and user expertise.” Management Science, 70(12): 9101–9117.
[59] Chen, Zeyang, Xinfa Cai, Chen Lin, Yu-Jane Liu, and Juanjuan Meng. 2025b. “Promoting Pension Participation: Evidence on Attention and Personalization from Two Field Experiments.” SSRN: 5375178.
[60] Cheung, Vanessa, Maximilian Maier, and Falk Lieder. 2025.
“Large language models show amplified cognitive biases in moral decision-making.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(25): e2412015122.
[61] Choi, Jung Ho, and Chloe Xie. 2025. “Human plus AI in accounting: Early evidence from the field.” [62] Coletta, Andrea, Kshama Dwarakanath, Penghang Liu, Svitlana Vyetrenko, and Tucker Balch. 2024. “LLM-driven Imitation of Sub-rational Behavior: Illusion or Reality?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08755, 2.
[63] Collins, Katherine M, Ilia Sucholutsky, Umang Bhatt, Kartik Chandra, Lionel Wong, Mina Lee, Cedegao E Zhang, Tan Zhi-Xuan, Mark Ho, Vikash Mansinghka, et al. 2024. “Building machines that learn and think with people.” Nature human behaviour, 8(10): 1851–1863.
[64] Costello, Thomas H, Gordon Pennycook, and David G Rand.
2024. “Durably reducing conspiracy beliefs through dialogues with AI.” Science, 385(6714): eadq1814.
[65] Cowgill, Bo. 2020. “Bias and productivity in humans and algorithms: Theory and evidence from resume screening.” Columbia Business School, Columbia University, 29.
34 [66] Cram, W Alec, Martin Wiener, Monideepa Tarafdar, and Alexander Benlian. 2022. “Examining the impact of algorithmic con-trol on Uber drivers’ technostress.” Journal of management information systems, 39(2): 426–453.
[67] Dai, Jingchen, Ruimin Li, Zhiyong Liu, and Shichao Lin. 2021.
“Impacts of the introduction of autonomous taxi on travel behaviors of the experienced user: Evidence from a one-year paid taxi service in Guangzhou, China.” Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Tech-nologies, 130: 103311.
[68] Dang, Junhua, Kevin M King, and Michael Inzlicht. 2020. “Why are self-report and behavioral measures weakly correlated?” Trends in cognitive sciences, 24(4): 267–269.
[69] Dathathri, Sumanth, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. 2020.
“Plug and Play Language Models: A Simple Approach to Controlled Text Generation.” [70] Davies, Adam, and Ashkan Khakzar. 2024. “The cognitive rev-olution in interpretability: From explaining behavior to interpreting representations and algorithms.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05859.
[71] deHaan, Ed, Chanseok Lee, Miao Liu, and Suzie Noh. 2025.
“The Shadow Price of.” Information (May 15, 2025).
[72] DellaVigna, Stefano, Devin Pope, and Eva Vivalt. 2019. “Predict science to improve science.” Science, 366(6464): 428–429.
[73] De Marchi, Scott, and Scott E Page. 2014. “Agent-based models.” Annual Review of political science, 17(1): 1–20.
[74] Dillion, Danica, Niket Tandon, Yuling Gu, and Kurt Gray.
2023. “Can AI language models replace human participants?” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 27(7): 597–600.
[75] Donahue, Kate, Alexandra Chouldechova, and Krishnaram Kenthapadi. 2022. “Human-algorithm collaboration: Achieving com-plementarity and avoiding unfairness.” 1639–1656.
35 [76] Doshi-Velez, Finale, and Been Kim. 2017. “Towards a rigorous sci-ence of interpretable machine learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608.
[77] Dreber, Anna, Thomas Pfeiffer, Johan Almenberg, Siri Isaks-son, Brad Wilson, Yiling Chen, Brian A Nosek, and Magnus Johannesson. 2015. “Using prediction markets to estimate the repro-ducibility of scientific research.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(50): 15343–15347.
[78] Dreyfuss, Bnaya, and Rapha¨ el Raux. 2026. “Human Learning About AI.” Extended abstract at EC ’25.
[79] Dreyfuss, Bnaya, and Ruru Hoong. 2025. “Calibrated Coarsening: Designing Information for AI-Assisted Decisions.” Working paper.
[80] Elazar, Yanai, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich Sch¨ utze, and Yoav Gold-berg. 2021. “Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained lan-guage models.” Transactions of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics, 9: 1012–1031.
[81] Eloundou, Tyna, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock. 2024. “GPTs are GPTs: Labor market impact potential of LLMs.” Science, 384(6702): 1306–1308.
[82] Epping, Gunnar, Andrew Caplin, Erik Duhaime, William Holmes, Daniel Martin, and Jennifer Trueblood. 2026. “Har-nessing Human Uncertainty to Train More Accurate and Aligned AI Systems.” Decision Analysis.
[83] Erdil, Ege, Andrei Potlogea, Tamay Besiroglu, Edu Roldan, Anson Ho, Jaime Sevilla, Matthew Barnett, Matej Vrzla, and Robert Sandler. 2025. “GATE: An Integrated Assessment Model for AI Automation.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04941.
[84] Esteva, Andre, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan M Swetter, Helen M Blau, and Sebastian Thrun. 2017.
“Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural net-works.” nature, 542(7639): 115–118.
36 [85] Fedyk, Anastassia, Ali Kakhbod, Peiyao Li, and Ulrike Mal-mendier. 2024. “AI and Perception Biases in Investments: An Experi-mental Study.” Available at SSRN 4787249.
[86] Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M Schmidt. 1999. “A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.” The quarterly journal of economics, 114(3): 817–868.
[87] Fisher, Robert J. 1993. “Social desirability bias and the validity of indirect questioning.” Journal of consumer research, 20(2): 303–315.
[88] Foerster, Jakob, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. 2016. “Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning.” Advances in neural information processing systems, 29.
[89] Frank, Michael C. 2023. “Baby steps in evaluating the capacities of large language models.” Nature Reviews Psychology, 2(8): 451–452.
[90] Frank, Morgan R, David Autor, James E Bessen, Erik Bryn-jolfsson, Manuel Cebrian, David J Deming, Maryann Feldman, Matthew Groh, Jos´ e Lobo, Esteban Moro, et al. 2019. “Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on labor.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(14): 6531–6539.
[91] Gabriel, Saadia, Liang Lyu, James Siderius, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Jacob Andreas, and Asuman E Ozdaglar. 2024. “MisinfoEval: Generative AI in the era of “alternative facts”.” 8566–8578.
[92] Garg, Rajiv. 2024. “The Impact of Generative Artificial Intelligence on Higher Education: Disruption or Seamless Integration?” Available at SSRN 4762814.
[93] Geiecke, Friedrich, and Xavier Jaravel. 2024. “Conversations at scale: Robust ai-led interviews with a simple open-source platform.” Available at SSRN 4974382.
[94] Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy. 2019. “Text as data.” Journal of Economic Literature, 57(3): 535–574.
37 [95] Gero, Katy Ilonka, Zahra Ashktorab, Casey Dugan, Qian Pan, James Johnson, Werner Geyer, Maria Ruiz, Sarah Miller, David R Millen, Murray Campbell, et al. 2020. “Mental mod-els of AI agents in a cooperative game setting.” 1–12.
[96] Gnewuch, Ulrich, Stefan Morana, Oliver Hinz, Ralf Kellner, and Alexander Maedche. 2024. “More than a bot? The impact of disclosing human involvement on customer interactions with hybrid service agents.” Information Systems Research, 35(3): 936–955.
[97] Goergen, Jonas, Emanuel de Bellis, and Anne-Kathrin Klesse.
2025. “AI assessment changes human behavior.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(25): e2425439122.
[98] Goldfarb, Avi, Xianda He, and Florenta Teodoridis. 2025. “Pat-terns of Artificial Intelligence Adoption by Hospitals.” Vol. 115, 40–45, American Economic Association 2014 Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203.
[99] Goli, Ali, and Amandeep Singh. 2024. “Frontiers: Can large language models capture human preferences?” Marketing Science, 43(4): 709–722.
[100] Goodfellow, Ian, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2016. Deep learning. Vol. 1, MIT press Cambridge.
[101] Green, Ben, and Yiling Chen. 2019. “The principles and limits of algorithm-in-the-loop decision making.” Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer interaction, 3(CSCW): 1–24.
[102] Grossmann, Igor, Matthew Feinberg, Dawn C Parker, Nicholas A Christakis, Philip E Tetlock, and William A Cun-ningham. 2023. “AI and the transformation of social science research.” Science, 380(6650): 1108–1109.
[103] Gulshan, Varun, Lily Peng, Marc Coram, Martin C Stumpe, Derek Wu, Arunachalam Narayanaswamy, Subhashini Venu-gopalan, Kasumi Widner, Tom Madams, Jorge Cuadros, et al.
2016. “Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs.” jama, 316(22): 2402–2410.
38 [104] Guo, Yuchen, Matthew O Jackson, and Ruixue Jia. 2024. “Com-rades and Cause: Peer Influence on West Point Cadets’ Civil War Allegiances.” Arxiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.09419.
[105] Hagendorff, Thilo, Ishita Dasgupta, Marcel Binz, Stephanie CY Chan, Andrew Lampinen, Jane X Wang, Zeynep Akata, and Eric Schulz. 2023. “Machine psychology.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13988.
[106] Hagendorff, Thilo, Ishita Dasgupta, Marcel Binz, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Andrew Lampinen, Jane X. Wang, Zeynep Akata, and Eric Schulz. 2024. “Machine Psychology.” arXiv.
[107] Hancock, Peter A, Illah Nourbakhsh, and Jack Stewart. 2019.
“On the future of transportation in an era of automated and autonomous vehicles.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(16): 7684– 7691.
[108] Hanson, Robin. 1995. “Could gambling save science? Encouraging an honest consensus.” [109] Hau, Nneka J. McGee Elizabeth Kozleski Christopher J.
Lemons Isabelle C. 2025. “AI Learning Differences Designing a Future with No Boundaries.” Preprint.
[110] Hausladen, Carina I, Manuel Knott, Colin F Camerer, and Pietro Perona. 2024. “Social perception of faces in a vision-language model.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14435.
[111] Herrmann, Daniel A, and Benjamin A Levinstein. 2025. “Stan-dards for belief representations in LLMs.” Minds and Machines, 35(1): 1– 25.
[112] Hessel, Jack, Ana Marasovi´ c, Jena D Hwang, Lillian Lee, Jeff Da, Rowan Zellers, Robert Mankoff, and Yejin Choi. 2023. “Do Androids Laugh at Electric Sheep? Humor “Understanding” Benchmarks from The New Yorker Caption Contest.” 688–714.
[113] Hewitt, Luke, Ashwini Ashokkumar, Isaias Ghezae, and Robb Willer. 2025. “Predicting Results of Social Science Experiments Using Large Language Models.” 39 [114] Hoffman, Mitchell, Lisa B Kahn, and Danielle Li. 2018. “Discre-tion in hiring.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2): 765–800.
[115] Hoffmann, Manuel, Sam Boysel, Frank Nagle, Sida Peng, and Kevin Xu. 2024. “Generative AI and the Nature of Work.” CESifo Working Paper.
[116] Holland, John H, and John H Miller. 1991. “Artificial adaptive agents in economic theory.” The American economic review, 81(2): 365– 370.
[117] Hornik, Kurt, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. 1989.
“Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators.” Neural networks, 2(5): 359–366.
[118] Horton, John J. 2017. “The effects of algorithmic labor market recommendations: Evidence from a field experiment.” Journal of Labor Economics, 35(2): 345–385.
[119] Horton, John J. 2023. “Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn from homo silicus?” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[120] Hossain, Mokter. 2023. “Autonomous delivery robots: A literature review.” IEEE Engineering Management Review, 51(4): 77–89.
[121] Howard, Jeremy, and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. “Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06146.
[122] Hsu, Shang-Ling, Raj Sanjay Shah, Prathik Senthil, Zahra Ashktorab, Casey Dugan, Werner Geyer, and Diyi Yang. 2025.
“Helping the helper: Supporting peer counselors via ai-empowered practice and feedback.” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 9(2): 1–45.
[123] Huang, Jiaxin, Shixiang Shane Gu, Le Hou, Yuexin Wu, Xuezhi Wang, Hongkun Yu, and Jiawei Han. 2022. “Large language models can self-improve.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610.
40 [124] Ide, Enrique, and Eduard Talam` as. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence in the Knowledge Economy.” Journal of Political Economy, 133(12).
[125] Jabarian, Brian, and Luca Henkel. 2025. “Voice AI in Firms: A Natural Field Experiment on Automated Job Interviews.” [126] Jackson, Matthew O, and Zafer Kanik.
2020.
“How automation that substitutes for labor affects production networks, growth, and income inequality.” SSRN 3375523, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3375523.
[127] Jang, Myeongjun, Deuk Sin Kwon, and Thomas Lukasiewicz.
2022. “BECEL: Benchmark for consistency evaluation of language mod-els.” 3680–3696.
[128] Jarrahi, Mohammad Hossein, Mareike M¨ ohlmann, and Min Kyung Lee. 2023. “Algorithmic management: The role of AI in managing workforces.” MIT Sloan Management Review, 64(3): 1–5.
[129] Jiang, Guangyuan, Manjie Xu, Song-Chun Zhu, Wenjuan Han, Chi Zhang, and Yixin Zhu. 2023. “Evaluating and inducing person-ality in pre-trained language models.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36: 10622–10643.
[130] Ji, Jiaming, Tianyi Qiu, Boyuan Chen, Borong Zhang, Hantao Lou, Kaile Wang, Yawen Duan, Zhonghao He, Lukas Vierling, Donghai Hong, Jiayi Zhou, Zhaowei Zhang, Fanzhi Zeng, Jun-tao Dai, Xuehai Pan, Kwan Yee Ng, Aidan O’Gara, Hua Xu, Brian Tse, Jie Fu, Stephen McAleer, Yaodong Yang, Yizhou Wang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yike Guo. 2025. “AI Alignment: A Comprehensive Survey.” arXiv.
[131] Jones, Cameron R, and Benjamin K Bergen. 2025. “Large lan-guage models pass the turing test.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23674.
[132] Kahneman, Daniel. 1979. “Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under risk.” Econometrica, 47: 278.
[133] Kazinnik, Sophia, and Tara M Sinclair. 2025. “Fomc in silico: A multi-agent system for monetary policy decision modeling.” Available at SSRN 5424097.
41 [134] Kearns, Michael, and Aaron Roth. 2019. The ethical algorithm: The science of socially aware algorithm design. Oxford University Press.
[135] Khatua, Arpandeep, Hao Zhu, Peter Tran, Arya Prabhudesai, Frederic Sadrieh, Johann K Lieberwirth, Xinkai Yu, Yicheng Fu, Michael J Ryan, Jiaxin Pei, et al. 2026. “CooperBench: Why Coding Agents Cannot be Your Teammates Yet.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13295.
[136] Kim, Junsol, and Byungkyu Lee. 2023. “Ai-augmented surveys: Leveraging large language models and surveys for opinion prediction.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09620.
[137] Kim, Junsol, James Evans, and Aaron Schein. 2025. “Linear representations of political perspective emerge in large language models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02080.
[138] Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2018. “Human decisions and machine predictions.” The quarterly journal of economics, 133(1): 237– 293.
[139] Kleinberg, Jon, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Cass R Sunstein. 2020. “Algorithms as discrimination detectors.” Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48): 30096–30100.
[140] K¨ ochling, Alina, and Marius Claus Wehner. 2020. “Discriminated by an algorithm: a systematic review of discrimination and fairness by algorithmic decision-making in the context of HR recruitment and HR development.” Business Research, 13(3): 795–848.
[141] Konda, Vijay, and John Tsitsiklis. 1999. “Actor-critic algorithms.” Advances in neural information processing systems, 12.
[142] Kozlowski, Austin C, and James Evans. 2025. “Simulating Sub-jects: The Promise and Peril of AI Stand-ins for Social Agents and Interactions.” [143] Kozlowski, Austin C, Hyunku Kwon, and James A Evans.
2024. “In silico sociology: forecasting COVID-19 polarization with large language models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11190.
42 [144] Krsteski, Stefan, Giuseppe Russo, Serina Chang, Robert West, and Kristina Gligori´ c. 2025. “Valid survey simulations with limited human data: The roles of prompting, fine-tuning, and rectification.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11408.
[145] Ku, Alexander, Declan Campbell, Xuechunzi Bai, Jiayi Geng, Ryan Liu, Raja Marjieh, R Thomas McCoy, Andrew Nam, Ilia Sucholutsky, Liyi Zhang, et al. 2026. “Levels of analysis for large language models.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 384(2320).
[146] Kumar, Aviral, Vincent Zhuang, Rishabh Agarwal, Yi Su, John D Co-Reyes, Avi Singh, Kate Baumli, Shariq Iqbal, Colton Bishop, Rebecca Roelofs, et al. 2024. “Training language models to self-correct via reinforcement learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12917.
[147] Kwa, Thomas, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney Von Arx, et al. 2025. “Measuring ai ability to complete long tasks.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14499.
[148] Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 443–478.
[149] Lampinen, Andrew K, Arslan Chaudhry, Stephanie CY Chan, Cody Wild, Diane Wan, Alex Ku, J¨ org Bornschein, Razvan Pascanu, Murray Shanahan, and James L McClelland. 2025.
“On the generalization of language models from in-context learning and finetuning: a controlled study.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00661.
[150] Lazer, David, Alex Pentland, Lada Adamic, Sinan Aral, Albert-L´ aszl´ o Barab´ asi, Devon Brewer, Nicholas Christakis, Noshir Contractor, James Fowler, Myron Gutmann, Tony Jebara, Gary King, Michael Macy, Deb Roy, and Marshall Van Alstyne. 2009.
“Computational Social Science.” Science, 323(5915): 721–723.
[151] LeCun, Yann, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. “Deep learning.” nature, 521(7553): 436–444.
43 [152] Lee, V Vien, Stephanie CC van der Lubbe, Lay Hoon Goh, and Jose Maria Valderas. 2024. “Harnessing ChatGPT for thematic anal-ysis: Are we ready?” Journal of Medical Internet Research, 26: e54974.
[153] Lehmann, Matthias, Philipp B Cornelius, and Fabian J Sting.
2024. “AI meets the classroom: When does ChatGPT harm learning?” Available at SSRN 4941259.
[154] Leng, Yan. 2024. “Can LLMs Mimic Human-Like Mental Accounting and Behavioral Biases?” Available at SSRN 4705130.
[155] Lippert, Steffen, Anna Dreber, Magnus Johannesson, Warren Tierney, Wilson Cyrus-Lai, Eric Luis Uhlmann, Emotion Ex-pression Collaboration, and Thomas Pfeiffer. 2024. “Can large language models help predict results from a complex behavioural science study?” Royal Society Open Science, 11(9): 240682.
[156] Li, Tao, Teng Ye, and De Liu. 2025. “Is ChatGPT a Boon or a Bane for Learning? Experimental Evidence Across Task Formats and Chatbot Designs.” [157] Louie, Ryan, Ananjan Nandi, William Fang, Cheng Chang, Emma Brunskill, and Diyi Yang. 2024. “Roleplay-doh: Enabling Domain-Experts to Create LLM-simulated Patients via Eliciting and Adhering to Principles.” 10570–10603.
[158] Lowe, Ryan, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. 2017. “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments.” Advances in neural information processing systems, 30.
[159] Lu, Wenhao, Xufeng Zhao, Josua Spisak, Jae Hee Lee, and Stefan Wermter. 2025. “Mental Modelling of Reinforcement Learn-ing Agents by Language Models.” Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
[160] Macrae, C Neil, Alan B Milne, and Galen V Bodenhausen.
1994. “Stereotypes as energy-saving devices: A peek inside the cognitive toolbox.” Journal of personality and Social Psychology, 66(1): 37.
44 [161] Madaan, Aman, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hal-linan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. 2023. “Self-refine: It-erative refinement with self-feedback.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36: 46534–46594.
[162] Madar´ asz, Krist´ of, David Danz, and Stephanie Wang. 2024.
“Projective Thinking: Model, Evidence, and Applications.” Working Paper.
[163] Ma, Ji. 2026. “Can Machines Think Like Humans: A Behavioral Evaluation of LLM Agents in Dictator Games.” Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 1–15.
[164] Manning, Benjamin S, Kehang Zhu, and John J Horton. 2024.
“Automated social science: Language models as scientist and subjects.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
[165] Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Michael Chui, Jacques Bughin, Jonathan Woetzel, Parul Batra, Ryan Ko, and Saurabh Sanghvi.
2017. “Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automa-tion.” McKinsey Global Institute, 150(1): 1–148.
[166] Markel, Julia M, Steven G Opferman, James A Landay, and Chris Piech. 2023. “Gpteach: Interactive ta training with gpt-based students.” 226–236.
[167] Ma, Weicheng, Chunyuan Deng, Aram Moossavi, Lili Wang, Soroush Vosoughi, and Diyi Yang. 2024. “Simulated misinformation susceptibility (smists): Enhancing misinformation research with large language model simulations.” 2774–2788.
[168] Mei, Qiaozhu, Yutong Xie, Walter Yuan, and Matthew O Jackson. 2024. “A Turing test of whether AI chatbots are behaviorally similar to humans.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(9): e2313925121.
[169] Messeri, Lisa, and Molly J Crockett. 2024. “Artificial intelli-gence and illusions of understanding in scientific research.” Nature, 627(8002): 49–58.
45 [170] Miehling, Erik, Michael Desmond, Karthikeyan Natesan Ra-mamurthy, Elizabeth M Daly, Pierre Dognin, Jesus Rios, Djallel Bouneffouf, and Miao Liu. 2024. “Evaluating the Prompt Steerability of Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12405.
[171] Milkman, Katherine L, Dena Gromet, Hung Ho, Joseph S Kay, Timothy W Lee, Pepi Pandiloski, Yeji Park, Aneesh Rai, Max Bazerman, John Beshears, et al. 2021. “Megastudies improve the impact of applied behavioural science.” Nature, 600(7889): 478–483.
[172] Miller, Tim. 2019. “Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences.” Artificial intelligence, 267: 1–38.
[173] Moore, Jared, Declan Grabb, William Agnew, Kevin Klyman, Stevie Chancellor, Desmond C Ong, and Nick Haber. 2025.
“Expressing stigma and inappropriate responses prevents LLMs from safely replacing mental health providers.” 599–627.
[174] Mou, Yi, and Kun Xu. 2017. “The media inequality: Comparing the initial human-human and human-AI social interactions.” Computers in Human Behavior, 72: 432–440.
[175] Musslick, Sebastian, Laura K Bartlett, Suyog H Chandramouli, Marina Dubova, Fernand Gobet, Thomas L Griffiths, Jessica Hullman, Ross D King, J Nathan Kutz, Christopher G Lu-cas, et al. 2025. “Automating the practice of science: Opportunities, challenges, and implications.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(5): e2401238121.
[176] Nachimovsky, Haya, Moshe Tennenholtz, and Oren Kurland.
2025. “A Multi-Agent Perspective on Modern Information Retrieval.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14796.
[177] Naseer, Aliza, Naveed Rafaqat Ahmad, and Muhammad Am-jad Chishti. 2025. “Psychological impacts of AI dependence: Assessing the cognitive and emotional costs of intelligent systems in daily life.” Review of Applied Management and Social Sciences, 8(1): 291–307.
[178] Nisbett, Richard E, and Lee Ross. 1980. “Human inference: Strate-gies and shortcomings of social judgment.” 46 [179] Novy-Marx, Robert, and Mihail Velikov. 2026. “Artificial Intelli-gence–Powered (Finance) Scholarship.” Journal of Economic Liteature.
[180] Obermeyer, Ziad, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2019. “Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations.” Science, 366(6464): 447–453.
[181] Opel, Nils, and Michael Breakspear. 2026. “Transforming men-tal health research and care through artificial intelligence.” Science, 391(6782): 249–258.
[182] Orlikowski, Matthias, Jiaxin Pei, Paul R¨ ottger, Philipp Cimi-ano, David Jurgens, and Dirk Hovy. 2025. “Beyond demographics: Fine-tuning large language models to predict individuals’ subjective text perceptions.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20897.
[183] Park, Chanwoo, Seungju Han, Xingzhi Guo, Asuman Ozdaglar, Kaiqing Zhang, and Joo-Kyung Kim. 2025. “Maporl: Multi-agent post-co-training for collaborative large language models with reinforce-ment learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18439.
[184] Park, Joon Sung, Carolyn Q Zou, Aaron Shaw, Benjamin Mako Hill, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Robb Willer, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2024. “Generative agent simulations of 1,000 people.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109.
[185] Park, Joon Sung, Joseph O’Brien, , Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023.
“Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior.” UIST ’23: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
[186] Peng, Kenny, and Nikhil Garg. 2024. “Monoculture in matching markets.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37: 81959– 81991.
[187] Peng, Kenny, Nikhil Garg, and Jon Kleinberg. 2025. “A no free lunch theorem for human-ai collaboration.” Vol. 39, 14369–14376.
47 [188] Peterson, Joshua C, David D Bourgin, Mayank Agrawal, Daniel Reichman, and Thomas L Griffiths. 2021. “Using large-scale experiments and machine learning to discover theories of human decision-making.” Science, 372(6547): 1209–1214.
[189] Phang, Jason, Michael Lampe, Lama Ahmad, Sandhini Agar-wal, Cathy Mengying Fang, Auren R Liu, Valdemar Danry, Eunhae Lee, Samantha WT Chan, Pat Pataranutaporn, et al.
2025. “Investigating Affective Use and Emotional Well-being on Chat-GPT.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03888.
[190] Pissarides, Christopher. 2025. “Labour markets and the future of work.” In The London Consensus: Economic Principles for the 21st Century. , ed. Tim Besley, Irene Bucelli and Andr´ es Velasco, 253–279.
London:LSE Press.
[191] Pronin, Emily. 2007. “Perception and misperception of bias in human judgment.” Trends in cognitive sciences, 11(1): 37–43.
[192] Qu, Andi. 2025. “No Humans Were Harmed in the Making of This Paper.” [193] Rabin, Matthew. 2002. “Inference by believers in the law of small numbers.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 775–816.
[194] Rahwan, Iyad, Manuel Cebrian, Nick Obradovich, Josh Bongard, Jean-Fran¸ cois Bonnefon, Cynthia Breazeal, Ja-cob W. Crandall, Nicholas A. Christakis, Iain D. Couzin, Matthew O. Jackson, Nicholas R. Jennings, Ece Kamar, Is-abel M. Kloumann, Hugo Larochelle, David Lazer, Richard McElreath, Alan Mislove, David C. Parkes, Alex ‘Sandy’ Pent-land, Margaret E. Roberts, Azim Shariff, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Michael Wellman. 2019. “Machine behaviour.” Nature, 568: 477– 486.
[195] Ren, Yuqing, Teng Ye, and Jundong Zhang. 2025. “Order Matters: AI-first Collaboration Mode Increases Productivity at the Cost of Worker Autonomy and Efficacy.” 48 [196] Ross, Jillian, Yoon Kim, and Andrew W Lo. 2024. “Llm economi-cus? mapping the behavioral biases of llms via utility theory.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02784.
[197] Rozenblit, Leonid, and Frank Keil. 2002. “The misunderstood limits of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.” Cognitive science, 26(5): 521–562.
[198] Russell, Stuart J, and Peter Norvig. 2016. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. pearson.
[199] Salazar-Miranda, Arianna, Zhuangyuan Fan, Michael Baick, Keith N Hampton, Fabio Duarte, Becky PY Loo, Edward Glaeser, and Carlo Ratti. 2025. “Exploring the social life of urban spaces through AI.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(30): e2424662122.
[200] Scherrer, Nino, Claudia Shi, Amir Feder, and David Blei.
2023. “Evaluating the moral beliefs encoded in llms.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36: 51778–51809.
[201] Schut, Lisa, Nenad Tomaˇ sev, Thomas McGrath, Demis Hass-abis, Ulrich Paquet, and Been Kim. 2025. “Bridging the human–AI knowledge gap through concept discovery and transfer in AlphaZero.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(13): e2406675122.
[202] Shaikh, Omar, Valentino Emil Chai, Michele Gelfand, Diyi Yang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2024. “Rehearsal: Simulating conflict to teach conflict resolution.” 1–20.
[203] Shechtman, Nicole, and Leonard M Horowitz. 2003. “Media in-equality in conversation: how people behave differently when interacting with computers and people.” 281–288.
[204] Shen, Hua, Tiffany Knearem, Reshmi Ghosh, Kenan Alkiek, Kundan Krishna, Yachuan Liu, Ziqiao Ma, Savvas Petridis, Yi-Hao Peng, Li Qiwei, et al. 2024. “Towards bidirectional human-ai alignment: A systematic review for clarifications, framework, and future directions.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09264.
49 [205] Shiffrin, Richard, and Melanie Mitchell. 2023. “Probing the psy-chology of AI models.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(10): e2300963120.
[206] Silver, David, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al.
2016. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.” nature, 529(7587): 484–489.
[207] Silver, David, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. 2017. “Mastering the game of go without human knowledge.” nature, 550(7676): 354–359.
[208] Singhal, Peeyush, Rahee Walambe, Sheela Ramanna, and Ketan Kotecha. 2023. “Domain adaptation: challenges, methods, datasets, and applications.” IEEE access, 11: 6973–7020.
[209] Sreedhar, Karthik, and Lydia Chilton. 2024. “Simulating hu-man strategic behavior: Comparing single and multi-agent llms.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08189.
[210] Stahl, Bernd Carsten, and Damian Eke. 2024. “The ethics of ChatGPT–Exploring the ethical issues of an emerging technology.” In-ternational Journal of Information Management, 74: 102700.
[211] Strachan, James WA, Dalila Albergo, Giulia Borghini, Ori-ana Pansardi, Eugenio Scaliti, Saurabh Gupta, Krati Saxena, Alessandro Rufo, Stefano Panzeri, Guido Manzi, et al. 2024.
“Testing theory of mind in large language models and humans.” Nature Human Behaviour, 8(7): 1285–1295.
[212] Sutton, Richard S, Andrew G Barto, et al. 1998. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Vol. 1, MIT press Cambridge.
[213] Tabrizi, Rogayeh. 2025a. Behavioral AI: Unleash Decision Making with Data. John Wiley & Sons.
[214] Tabrizi, Rogayeh. 2025b. “Magic Happens at the Intersections.” 50 [215] Tessler, Michael Henry, Michiel A Bakker, Daniel Jarrett, Han-nah Sheahan, Martin J Chadwick, Raphael Koster, Georgina Evans, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Tantum Collins, David C Parkes, et al. 2024. “AI can help humans find common ground in democratic deliberation.” Science, 386(6719): eadq2852.
[216] Tirole, Jean. 1988. The theory of industrial organization. MIT press.
[217] Truong, Sang, Yuheng Tu, Percy Liang, Bo Li, and Sanmi Koyejo. 2025. “Reliable and efficient amortized model-based evaluation.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13335.
[218] Vaccaro, Michelle, Abdullah Almaatouq, and Thomas Malone.
2024. “When combinations of humans and AI are useful: A systematic review and meta-analysis.” Nature Human Behaviour, 8(12): 2293–2303.
[219] Varian, Hal. 2018. “Artificial intelligence, economics, and industrial organization.” In The economics of artificial intelligence: an agenda.
399–419. University of Chicago Press.
[220] Varnum, Michael EW, Nicolas Baumard, Mohammad Atari, and Kurt Gray. 2024. “Large Language Models based on historical text could offer informative tools for behavioral science.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(42): e2407639121.
[221] Voelkel, Jan G, Michael N Stagnaro, James Y Chu, Sophia L Pink, Joseph S Mernyk, Chrystal Redekopp, Isaias Ghezae, Matthew Cashman, Dhaval Adjodah, Levi G Allen, et al. 2024.
“Megastudy testing 25 treatments to reduce antidemocratic attitudes and partisan animosity.” Science, 386(6719): eadh4764.
[222] Wang, Jing Yi, Nicholas Sukiennik, Tong Li, Weikang Su, Qianyue Hao, Jingbo Xu, Zihan Huang, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2024a. “A Survey on Human-Centric LLMs.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.14491.
[223] Wang, Rose E, Ana T Ribeiro, Carly D Robinson, Susanna Loeb, and Dora Demszky. 2024b. “Tutor CoPilot: A human-AI ap-proach for scaling real-time expertise.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03017.
51 [224] Wang, Yufei, Wanjun Zhong, Liangyou Li, Fei Mi, Xingshan Zeng, Wenyong Huang, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, and Qun Liu.
2023. “Aligning large language models with human: A survey.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12966.
[225] Weaver, Bradley W, and Patricia R DeLucia. 2022. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of takeover performance during conditionally automated driving.” Human factors, 64(7): 1227–1260.
[226] Weintraub, Gabriel Y, Victor Morales, Juan Eduardo Car-mach, and Alvaro Soto. 2025. “Generative Artificial Intelligence: Opportunities for the Future of Work in Chile.” Available at SSRN 5187299.
[227] Westwood, Sean J. 2025. “The potential existential threat of large language models to online survey research.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122(47).
[228] Wiles, Emma, and John J Horton. 2024. “More, but worse: The impact of AI writing assistance on the supply and quality of job posts.” [229] Wiles, Emma, and John J Horton. 2025. “Generative ai and labor market matching efficiency.” Available at SSRN 5187344.
[230] Will, Paris, Dario Krpan, and Grace Lordan. 2023. “People versus machines: introducing the HIRE framework.” Artificial Intelligence Review, 56(2): 1071–1100.
[231] Xie, Chengxing, Canyu Chen, Feiran Jia, Ziyu Ye, Shiyang Lai, Kai Shu, Jindong Gu, Adel Bibi, Ziniu Hu, David Jurgens, et al. 2024. “Can Large Language Model Agents Simulate Human Trust Behavior?” [232] Xie, Yutong, Qiaozhu Mei, Walter Yuan, and Matthew O Jack-son. 2025a. “Using language models to decipher the motivation behind human behaviors.” PNAS forthcoming, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.15752.
[233] Xie, Yutong, Zhuoheng Li, Xiyuan Wang, Yijun Pan, Qijia Liu, Xingzhi Cui, Kuang-Yu Lo, Ruoyi Gao, Xingjian Zhang, Jin Huang, et al. 2025b. “Be. FM: Open Foundation Models for Human Behavior.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23058.
52 [234] Yang, Diyi, Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Michael S Bernstein, and John Mitchell. 2024a. “Social skill train-ing with large language models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04204.
[235] Yang, Joshua C, Damian Dalisan, Marcin Korecki, Carina I Hausladen, and Dirk Helbing. 2024b. “LLM Voting: Human Choices and AI Collective Decision-Making.” Vol. 7, 1696–1708.
[236] Yang, Linyi, Yaoxian Song, Xuan Ren, Chenyang Lyu, Yidong Wang, Jingming Zhuo, Lingqiao Liu, Jindong Wang, Jennifer Foster, and Yue Zhang. 2023. “Out-of-distribution generalization in natural language processing: Past, present, and future.” 4533–4559.
[237] Yang, Yang, Wu Youyou, and Brian Uzzi. 2020. “Estimating the deep replicability of scientific findings using human and artificial intelli-gence.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(20): 10762– 10768.
[238] Yeykelis, Leo, Kaavya Pichai, James J Cummings, and Byron Reeves. 2024. “Using Large Language Models to Create AI Personas for Replication, Generalization and Prediction of Media Effects: An Empirical Test of 133 Published Experimental Research Findings.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16073.
[239] Yin, Yidan, Nan Jia, and Cheryl J Wakslak. 2024. “AI can help people feel heard, but an AI label diminishes this impact.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 121(14): e2319112121.
[240] Zhang, Ke, and Ayse Begum Aslan. 2021. “AI technologies for ed-ucation: Recent research & future directions.” Computers and education: Artificial intelligence, 2: 100025.
[241] Zhang, Shuhuai, Shu Wang, Zijun Yao, Chuanhao Li, Xiaozhi Wang, Songfa Zhong, and Tracy Xiao Liu. 2026. “Understanding the Mechanism of Altruism in Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11610.
[242] Zhou, Guangsu, Gaosi Chu, Lixing Li, and Lingsheng Meng.
2020. “The effect of artificial intelligence on China’s labor market.” China Economic Journal, 13(1): 24–41.
53 [243] Zhou, Lexin, Pablo A Moreno-Casares, Fernando Mart´ ınez-Plumed, John Burden, Ryan Burnell, Lucy Cheke, C` esar Ferri, Alexandru Marcoci, Behzad Mehrbakhsh, Yael Moros-Daval, et al. 2023. “Predictable Artificial Intelligence.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06167.
[244] Zinkevich, Martin, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. 2007. “Regret minimization in games with incom-plete information.” Advances in neural information processing systems, 20.
54